## Section

## Establishment of the Meteorological Authority

1. Establishment of the Authority
2. Object of the Authority
3. Functions of the Authority
4. Governing body of the Authority
5. Functions of the Board
6. Tenure of office of members of the Board
7. Meetings of the Board
8. Disclosure of interest
9. Establishment of committees
10. Organisation and operation of the National Framework for Climate Services
11. Offices of the Authority
12. Allowances
13. Policy directives

## GHANA METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2025

## ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

## Administrative provisions

14. Director-General of the Authority
15. Functions of the Director-General
16. Principal Officers of the Authority
17. Secretary to the Board
18. Appointment of other Staff
19. Funds of the Authority
20. Bank Account of the Authority
21. Administrative expenses of the Authority
22. Internal Audit Unit
23. Accounts and audit
24. Annual report and other reports
25. Borrowing powers
26. Tax exemption

## National Meteorological Fund

27. Establishment of the National Meteorological Fund
28. Objects of the Fund
29. Application of monies for the Fund
30. Sources of money for the Fund
31. Bank account for the Fund
32. Payments from the Fund
33. Management of the Fund
34. Investment of the Fund

Licensing and Related Matters

35. Requirement for licence to operate
36. Application for a licence
37. Conditions for grant of a licence
38. Grant of licence
39. Non-transferability of licence
40. Renewal of licence
41. Suspension of licence
42. Revocation of licence
43. Restoration of licence
44. Appeals to the Tribunal
45. Confidentiality
46. Improper use official seal of the organisation
47. Offences
48. Offences by a body of persons
49. Power to enter land or premises
50. Execution of contract
51. Regulations
52. Interpretation
53. Repeal and savings
54. Transitional Provisions

## Miscellaneous Provisions

## SCHEDULE

(Section 46)

## A

## BILL

## ENTITLED

## GHANA METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2025

AN ACT to provide for the establishment of a Meteorological Authority as a regulatory body to license  and  regulate  the  operations  of  meteorological  data  services  providers;  to  spearhead meteorological research and training; advice on all weather and climate issues and to ensure that all meteorological services and practices meet the international standards and for related matters.

## PASSED by Parliament  and assented  to by the President

Establishment of the Meteorological Authority

## Establishment of the Authority

1. (1) There is established by this Act,  the Ghana Meteorological Authority as a body corporate.
- (2) The Authority may for the performance of the functions of the Authority acquire

and hold property, dispose of property and enter into any contract or  related transaction .

(3) Where there is an hindrance to the acquisition of land, the land  may be acquired for the Authority under the Lands Act, 2020 (Act 1036) and the cost shall be borne by the Authority.

## Object of the Authority

2. The object of the Authority is to provide meteorological services in the country and ensure the operation and maintenance of international standards and practices in meteorology in the country.

## Functions of the Authority

3. To achieve the object under section 2, the Authority shall
2. (a) advise Government on meteorology generally;
3. (b) issue weather forecasts for the safe operation of aircraft, ocean-going vessels, oil rigs and other socio-economic activities;
4. (c) provide  meteorological  information,  advice  and  warnings  for  the  benefit  of agriculture, civil and  military aviation, surface and marine transport, operational hydrology and management of energy and water resources to mitigate the effects of  natural  disasters  such  as  floods,  storms  and  droughts  on  socio-economic development and projects;
5. (d) promote  the use of meteorology  in agriculture, prevention of drought and desertification activities;
6. (e) establish, organise and manage surface and upper air observational station networks;
7. (f) collect, process, and disseminate meteorological information nationally and internationally in accordance with the rules, practices and procedures established under international conventions;
8. (g) ensure  uniform  standards  of  observation  of  meteorological  phenomena  in  the country;
9. (h) train, conduct and undertake research particularly in the field of tropical, agricultural, hydrological and other aspects of meteorology;
10. (i) store  meteorological  data  and  information  for  the  purposes  of  planning  and implementation of infrastructural projects;
11. (j) develop and provide telecommunication systems for meteorological purposes only;
12. (k) participate  in  local  and  international  training  and  research  in  meteorology  and climatology  and  in  other  related fields in  co-operation  with  other relevant institutions and authorities concerned with applied meteorological research;
13. (l) collaborate with  relevant foreign and international organisations for the purposes of this Act;
14. (m) be the sole authority to approve the establishment of meteorological stations for meteorological observations and the approved stations share data with the Authority;
15. (n) provide consultancy services in meteorology to the public;
16. (o) calibrate,  develop and fabricate meteorological equipment for internal use and export;
17. (p) conduct investigations into meteorological issues and advise the Minister accordingly;
18. (q) ensure due compliance with conventions, protocols and any other relevant standards and recommended practices of the World Meteorological Organisation; and

- (r) perform such other functions as are incidental to the objects of the Authority or as the Minister in consultation with the Board may direct.

## Governing body of the Authority.

4. (1) The governing body of the Authority is a Board consisting of
2. (a) the Minister, as chairperson ;
3. (b) the Director-General of the Authority;
4. (c) a  representative  each  not  below  the  rank  of  a  Director  nominated  by  the respective Minister responsible  for
5. (i) Communication, Digital Technology and Innovations;
6. (ii) Transport;
7. (iii) Environment and Science;
8. (d) a representative each from
9. (i) the  Water  Resources  Commission  not  below  the  rank  of  a Director;
10. (ii) the Ghana Institution of Engineering;
11. (iii)a university in the country that offers Meteorology and Climate Science nominated by the Minister;
12. (iv) the air transport industry; and
13. (e) t wo other persons one of whom is a woman nominated by the President.

## (2) The President shall, in accordance with article 70 of the Constitution, appoint the members of the Board

(3)  The President shall in making appointments under paragraph (e) of subsection 1, have regard to the expertise and experience of the persons in matters related to the functions of the Authority.

## Functions of the Board

5. The Board shall
2. (a) ensure the implementation of the objects and functions of the Authority;
3. (b) ensure  the  implementation  of  rules,  regulations  and  procedures  laid  down  by  the World Meteorological Organisation in accordance with provisions under this Act;
4. (c) manage  the National Meteorological Fund; and
5. (d) formulate policies for the efficient  and effective performance of the functions of the Authority.

## Tenure of office of members of the Board

6. (1)  A member of the Board shall hold office for a period of three years and is eligible for re-appointment for another term only.

(2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to the Director- General or any other person who is a member of the Board  by virtue of office.

(3)  A member of the Board other than the Director-General may, at any time by letter addressed to the President through the Minister, resign from office.

(4)  A member of the Board, other than the Director-General who is absent from three consecutive meeting of the Board without sufficient cause ceases to be a member of the Board.

(5) A member may, at any time, resign from office in writing addressed to the President through the Minister.

(6)Where a member of the Board is for sufficient reason, unable to act as a member of the Board, the Minister shall determine whether the inability would result in the declaration of a vacancy.

(7) Where there is a vacancy

(a) under subsection (3),(4), (5) or subsection (2) of section 8,

(b) as a result of a declaration under subsection (6), or

(c) by reason of the death of a member, the Minister shall notify the President of the vacancy and the President shall appoint a person to fill the vacancy.

## Meetings of the Board.

7. (1) The Board shall meet at least once every three months  for the conduct of business at a time and place determined by the chairperson.

(2) The chairperson shall, at the request in writing of not less than one-third of the membership of the Board, convene an  extraordinary meeting of the Board at a time and place determined by the Board.

(3) The quorum at a meeting of the Board is seven members.

(4) The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the Board  and in the absence of the chairperson, a member of the Board elected by the members present from among their number shall preside.

(5) Matters before the Board shall be decided by a majority of members present and voting and in the event of equality of votes, the person presiding shall have a casting vote.

(6) The Board may co-opt a person to attend a  meeting of the Board but that person shall not vote on a matter for decision at the meeting.

(7) The proceedings of the Board shall not be invalidated  because of a vacancy among the members or by a defect in the appointment or qualification of a member of the Board.

(8) Subject to this section, the Board shall determine the procedure for its meetings of the Board.

## Disclosure of interest

8. (1) A member of the Board who has in interest in a matter for consideration

- (a) shall disclose in writing the nature of the interest and the disclosure shall form part of the record for the consideration of the matter; and
- (b) is  disqualified  from  being  present  at  or  participating  in  the  deliberations  of  the Board except in respect of that matter.

(2) A member ceases to be a member of the Board if the member if that member has an interest in the matter before the Board and

(a) fails to disclose that interest; or

- (b) is  present  at  or  participates  in  the  deliberations  of  the  Board  in  respect  of  that matter.

(3) Without limiting any further cause of action that may be instituted against the member, the Board shall recover any benefit derived by a member who contravenes subsection(1) in addition to the revocation of the appointment of that member.

## Establishment of committees

9. (1) The Board may establish a committee consisting of members of the Board and nonmembers of the Board or both to perform a function of the Board.

(2) A committee composed of members and non-members of the Board shall be chaired by a member of the Board.

(3) A Committee of the Board composed of non-members only is advisory.

- (4) Section 8 applies to members of a committee of the Board.

## Organisation and operation of the National Framework for Climate Services 10. The Minister shall be responsible to

- (a) organise and operationalise of the National Framework for Climate Services;
- (b) oversee the establishment of the Inter-ministerial Committee for the operation of the National Framework for Climate Services; and
- (c) establish the Scientific and Technical Committee for the operations of the National Framework for Climate Services.

## Offices of the Authority

11. (1) The Authority shall establish regional offices of the Authority in the regional capitals.

(2) The Authority may establish other offices within a region as the Board may determine.

(3) An office established by the Authority shall perform the functions determined by the Authority.

## Allowances

12. Members of the Board and members of a committee shall be paid allowances approved by the Minister in consultation with the Minister for Finance.

## Policy directives

13. The Minister may give directives to the Board on matters of policy and the Board shall comply

## Director-General of the Authority

14. (1) The President shall, in accordance with article 195, appoint a Director- General for the Authority.

(2) The Director-General

- (a) is the chief executive of the Authority; and
- (b) shall hold office on terms and conditions specified in the letter of appointment .

## Functions of the Director-General

15. (1) The Director-General is

- (a) responsible for the day to day administration of the Authority;
- (b) responsible for the implementation of the decisions of the Authority; and
- (c) answerable to the Board.

(2) The Director-General shall perform any other function assigned by the Board.

(3) The Director-General may delegate a function to an officer of the Authority but is not relieved of the ultimate responsibility for the performance of the delegated function.

(4) The Director-General shall be the permanent representative of Ghana to the World Meteorological  Organization  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Regulation  6  of  the  World Meteorological Organization, Basic Document No. 15.

## Principal officers of the Authority

16. (1) The Director-General shall be assisted by two Deputy Directors-General and other principal officers as the Board may determine.

(2) The President shall in accordance with the advice of the Board given in consultation with the Public Services Commission appoint the two Deputy Directors-General and other principal officers of the Authority.

## Secretary to the Board.

17. (1) The Board shall designate the head of legal services of the Authority as Secretary to the  Board.

(2) The Secretary shall

- (a) be a legal practitioner of less than 10 years standing as a lawyer;
- (b) subject to the directions of the Board, arrange the business of the meetings of the Board;
- (c) record and keep the minutes of the meetings and proceedings of the Board; and
- (d) perform  any  other  function  as  the  Board  and  the  Director-General  may  in writing, direct.

## Appointment of other Staff

18. (1) The President shall in accordance with article 195, appoint other officers and staff of the Authority necessary for the effective and efficient performance of the functions of the Authority.

(2) The Board may on the recommendations of the Director-General engage the services of experts and consultants as the Board may determine.

(3) The appointment of officers of the Authority shall be made by the President in accordance with the advice of the Board given in consultation with the Public Services Commission and upon such terms and conditions as the appointing authority shall determine.

## Funds of the Authority

19. The Fund of the Authority include

- (a) moneys approved by Parliament in the budget;
- (b) administrative penalties payable under this Act;
- (c) loans, donations and grants;
- (d) moneys accruing to the Authority from investments;
- (e) any other internally generated fund;

## Bank account of the Authority

20. Money for the Authority shall be paid into a bank account opened for the purpose with the approval of the Controller and Accountant-General.

## Administrative expenses of the Authority

21. The administrative expenses of the Authority shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.

## Internal Audit Unit

22. ( 1) The Authority shall have an Internal Audit Unit in accordance with section 83 of the Public Financial Management Act, 2016 (Act 921).

(2) The Internal Audit Unit shall be headed by an Internal Auditor who shall be appointed in accordance with the Internal Audit Agency Act, 2003 (Act 658).

(3) The Internal Auditor is responsible for the internal audit of the Authority.

(4) The Internal Auditor shall, subject to subsections (3) and (4) of section 16 of the Internal Audit Agency Act, 2003 (Act 658), at intervals of three months

- (a) a prepare and submit to the Board, a report on the internal audit carried out during the period of three months immediately preceding the preparation of the report; and
- (b) make recommendations in each report, with respect to matters which appear to  the  Internal  Auditor  as  necessary  for  the  conduct  of  the  affairs  of  the Authority.

(5) The Internal Auditor shall, in accordance with subsection 4 of section 16 of the Internal  Audit  Agency  Act, 2003 (Act 658),  submit a copy of each report prepared under this section to the Director-General and the chairperson of the Board

Accounts and audit

23. (1) The Board shall keep books, records and returns of account and other documents relevant  to accounts in a form approved by the Auditor-General.

(2)  The  Board shall submit the accounts of the Authority to the Auditor-General within three months after the end of the financial year.

(3)  The  Auditor-General  within  six  months  after  the  end  of  the  immediately  preceding financial year, audit the accounts of the Authority and forward a copy each of the audited report to the Minister and the Board.

(4) The financial year of the Authority is the same as the financial year of the government.

Annual report and other reports.

24. (1) The Board shall within thirty days after receipt of the audit report, submit an annual report to the Minister covering the activities and operations of the Authority for the year to which the annual report relates.

(2)The annual report shall include the report of the Auditor-General.

(3) The Minister shall within two months after receipt of the annual report, submit the report to Parliament with a statement that the Minister considers necessary.

(4) The Board shall submit to the Minister any other report which the Minister may require in writing.

## Borrowing powers

25. (1) Subject to article 181 of the Constitution and section 76 of the Public Financial Management Act, 2016 (Act 921) and with prior consent in writing of the Minister responsible for Finance, the Authority may borrow money from a body corporate, financial market or any other person,

(2) For the purposes of securing the money borrowed, the Authority may mortgage, charge or pledge a right, title or an interest in any of the properties of the Authority.

## Tax exemption

26. Subject to article 174 of the Constitution and the Exemptions Act 2022, Act ( 1038) the Authority is exempt from the payment of taxes that the Minister, may in writing, determine, with the prior approval of Parliament.

## National Meteorological Fund

## Establishment of the National Meteorological Fund

27. There is established by this Act the National Meteorological Fund.

Objects of the Fund

28. …………………………………….

## Application of moneys for the Fund

29. Moneys of the Fund shall be applied for

- (a) publicity and promotion of the activities of the Authority;
- (b) research, studies and investigations related to the functions of the Authority;
- (c) human resource development;
- (d) the  development  and  maintenance  of  any  property  vested  in  or  owned  by  the Authority; and
- (e) other purposes relevant to the object of the Authority as the Board in consultation with the Minister shall determine.

## Sources of money for the Fund

30. The sources of money for the Fund are
2. (a) monies approved by Parliament ;
3. (b) fees and charges accruing to the Authority in the performance of the functions of the Authority;
4. (c) ten  percent of  all  Landing  Charges  collected  by  the  Ghana  Civil  Aviation Authority in accordance with section 71 of the Ghana Civil Aviation Act, 2024 (Act 1120);
5. (d) ten  percent of  Over-flight  Charges  collected  by  the  Ghana  Civil  Aviation Authority in accordance with section 71 of the Ghana Civil Aviation Act, 2024 (Act 1120);
6. (e) five  percent of  Airport Tax collected by an aerodrome operator in accordance with section 1 of the Airport Tax Act, 1963 (Act 209);
7. (f) one percent of the tax-exclusive cost of construction works contract in respect of all government and non-government buildings, roads, dams, telecommunication masts and other related projects in Ghana, for the provision of meteorological information.
8. (g) two and half percent of pre-tax contract value of construction works.
9. (h) three  percent per  barrel  of  crude  oil  produced  by  offshore  and  onshore Companies.
10. (i) three  percent of  all  registration  and  licencing  fees  collected  by  the  Fisheries Commission;
11. (j) ten percent of gross revenue of freight of all international inbound and outbound cargo from ships or shipping companies operating in Ghana collected and paid over to the Ghana Maritime Administration Authority.
12. (k) three  percent of  all  habour  and  river  guide  dues  and  rates  collected  by  the National Inland Waterways Authority.
13. (l) seven  and  half  percent of  all  harbour  and  port  charges/  dues  and  pilotage dues/charges collected by the Ghana Ports and Harbour Authority.
14. (m) five percent of all premiums collected by the Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool from policy holders, for the provision of agro-meteorological services.
15. (n) five  percent of  the  total  premiums  collected  annually  by  agricultural  insurance providers  and  related  entities  as  a  cost  recovery  fee  for  the  provision  of  agrometeorological data and information.
16. (o) fees and funds from meteorological training schools
17. (p) fees and funds from meteorological calibration laboratory

(q) interest from investments;

(r) loans; and

- (s) grants, donations and gifts.

## Bank account for the Fund

31. The moneys for the Fund shall be paid into a bank account opened by the Board for the purpose with the approval of the Controller and Accountant- General.

## Payments from the Fund

32. All payments from the Fund shall be by cheque and signed by
2. (a) the Chairperson of the Board or in the absence of the Chairperson any member of the Board designated to do so; and
3. (b) the Director-General.

## Management of the Fund

## 33. (1) The Fund shall be administered by the Board.

- (2) The Board shall for the purpose of administration of  the Fund
2. (a) formulate policies to generate money for the Fund;
3. (b) determine the allocation to be made towards the objects of the Fund; and
4. (c) determine annual targets of the Fund.
- (3)  Sections 23 and 24 apply to the Fund.

## Investment of the Fund

## 34. The Board may invest a part of the Fund as it considers appropriate in securities as the Minister responsible for Finance .

## Licensing and Related Matters

## Requirement for licence to operate

35. A person shall not
2. (a) provide meteorological data services,
3. (b) provide services as a meteorological agent,
4. (c) engage in any business connected with the provision of meteorological services, or
5. (d) engage in meteorological transactions

unless that person has obtained a license to operate as a Meteorological Services Provider or Agent from the Authority.

## Application for a licence

## 36. (1) A person shall apply to the Authority for a licence as a Meteorological Service Provider or Agent.

- (2) An application for a licence shall
2. (a) be made to the Authority in the form determined by the Board;
3. (b) in the case of a company, society, association or partnership be accompanied with an attestation that officers of the company, society, association or partnership do not have any criminal record; and
4. (c) where appropriate, be accompanied with the prescribed fee for the examination of equipment.

## Conditions for grant of a licence

37. ( 1) The Authority may issue a licence to a person if the person has met all the requirements determined by the Authority.

- (2) The Authority shall publish the requirements for application for the licence.

## Grant of licence

38. (1) The Authority shall, on receipt of an application, carry out background checks, including investigation of criminal history and inspection of the facilities of the applicant, that the Authority considers necessary.

(2) The Authority shall, within sixty days after the receipt of an application, if the Authority determines that the applicant has satisfied the conditions of a licence, grant the applicant a licence.

(3) A licence issued under subsection (2) shall

(a) be in the form determined by the Authority;

(b) bear the name and address of the licensee;

(c) indicate the date of issue;

- (d) be valid for one year from the date of issue and is renewable; and
- (e) be subject to the terms and conditions determined by the Board; and bear the seal of the Authority.

## Non-transferability of licence

39. A licence issued under this Act is not transferable.

## Renewal of licence

40. (1) A licence granted under section 38 may be renewed, if the application for renewal is

- (a) made within thirty days before the licence expires;
- (b) signed and accompanied with a statutory declaration by the applicant; and
- (c) in the form determined by the Authority;
- (d) not in breach of any of the terms and conditions of the licence;
- (e) accompanied with the valid tax clearance certificate; and
- (f) accompanied with the prescribed fee for the renewal of the licence.

(2) An application for renewal shall satisfy the requirements for grant of a licence.

## Suspension of licence

41. (1) The Authority may suspend the licence of a meteorological  service provider or agent or where the Authority determines that the meteorological agent has failed to perform the function specified in the licence.

(2) The Authority shall suspend the licence, if the Authority

- (a) gives at least ten days' notice to the service provider or agent whose licence the Authority intends to suspend;
- (b) states in the notice the grounds for the suspension;
- (c) serves on the service provider or agent a copy of any complaint or charges which the Authority proposes to consider; and
- (d) gives the agent, the opportunity to be heard either in person or be represented by a

lawyer,  and  examine  and  cross-examine  witnesses  and  present  documents  and other evidence in support of the case of that service provider or agent .

(3) The Authority shall suspend the licence of a meteorological service provider or Agent who, after being given notice, fails to take the required remedial action within the specified time.

## Revocation of licence

42. Subject to this Act , the Authority shall revoke the licence of an agent or service if the Authority determines that

- (a) the licence was obtained by fraud;
- (b) the  agent is convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction for a serious offence;
- (c) in the performance of a function authorised by the licence, the agent knowingly makes a fraudulent misrepresentation; or
- (d) the equipment of the agent is found to be substandard during inspections.

## Restoration of licences

43. The Authority shall restore a licence if the licensee complies with the directives issued by the Authority.

## Appeals to the Tribunal

44. (1) An Applicant who is aggrieved by  a decision of the Authority in respect of a suspension, revocation or refusal to grant a licence shall appeal to the Appeal tribunal .

(2) The decision of the tribunal shall be final and binding.

## Confidentiality

45. (1) A member of the Board, the Director-General, or any other officer or employee of the Authority shall

- (a) subject to any existing law, treat as confidential any information obtained in the exercise of powers or the performance of duties under this Act; and
- (b) not disclose any information except when required to do so by a court, under any enactment or other circumstances determined by the Board.

(3) Any person who contravenes to subsection (1) shall be subject to disciplinary action, and in the case of a member of the Board be liable to be removed from the Board.

## Improper use of the official seal of the organisation

46. (1) A person shall not, without the authority of the Minister use

- (a) the official seal and emblem of the World Meteorological Organisation as specified in the schedule; or
- (b) the designation "World Meteorological Organization" or an abbreviation of that designation.

(3) A  person  who  contravenes  subsection  (1)  commits  an  offence  and  is  liable  on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding 200 penalty units and shall forfeit to the Republic the goods in connection with which the seal, emblem or designation was used.

## Offences

47. ( 1) A person shall not

- (a) provide  or  secure  meteorological  data  for  use  in  or  out  of  of  Ghana, without a license granted by the Authority;
- (b) contravenes the regulations, rules, orders or directives issued under any of the provisions of this Act;
- (2)  A  person  who  contravenes  subsection  (1)  commits  an  offence  is  liable ....................................................

Offences  by a body of persons

48. (1) Where  an offence is committed by a body of persons

- (a) in the case of a body corporate, every director or officer of that body corporate shall be deemed to have committed that offence; and
- (b) in the case of a partnership or a firm, every partner of the partnership or firm shall be deemed to have committed that offence

(2) A person shall not be deemed to have committed an offence under subsection (1), if that person proves that the act  in respect of which  that person is charged was committed by some other person without the consent  or connivance of that person and that the person exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of the offence having regard to all the circumstances.

## Miscellaneous Provisions

## Power to enter land or premises

## 49. (1) For the purpose of carrying out a function under this Act, an officer of the

Authority may, after giving notice to the owner or occupier of any land or premises, enter the land or premises and do any act reasonably necessary for carrying out the function and in particular may

- (a) inspect and examine a land, building or equipment of meteorological stations;
- (b) inspect  and  examine  accounts,  records  and  memoranda  required  to  be  kept  by meteorological stations;
- (c) cut down and remove any tree, underwood or structure that  may interfere with surveys; and
- (d) remove  any  installation  which constitutes a hindrance  to the delivery of meteorological climate in consultation with the Environmental Protection Authority.

(2) The Authority shall pay compensation for any damage caused as a result of action taken under subsection (1), and the liability for and the amount of  the compensation shall in case of dispute be settled in the first instance by negotiation.

(3) The Authority may delegate a power under this section to the relevant District Assembly.

## Execution of contract

50. (1) The use of the seal of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signatures of (a) the Director-General; and

- (b) the chairperson of the Board or in the absence of the chairperson any other officer of the Authority authorised by the Authority to authenticate the use of the seal.
- (2) An instrument or contract which if executed or entered into by a person other than a body corporate would not require to be under seal, may be executed or entered into on behalf of the Authority by the Director-General or any member of the Authority if the person has previously been authorised by a decision of the board to execute or enter into that particular agreement or contract.
- (3) This section is subject to section 12 of the Contracts Act, 1960 (Act 25).

## Regulations

51. (1) The Minister may by legislative instrument make regulations to provide for
2. (a) guidelines for climatic requirement for sectoral activities;
3. (b) the establishment of meteorological stations;
4. (c) matters in respect of which fees are payable;
5. (d) aeronautical services;
6. (e) uniform standards in the observation of meteorological phenomena; and
7. (f) provide for the requirement for the grant of a licence.

## Interpretation.

52. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires;
2. 'Authority' means the Ghana Meteorological Authority established under section 1 of this Act;
3. 'Aeronautical service' includes information, direction and other facilities furnished, issued or provided in connection with meteorological forecasts or data;
4. 'agro-meteorology' means the application of meteorological information and data in the monitoring and management of agricultural activities;

'Board' means the governing body of the Authority established under section 4 of this Act;

'Conventions' means the WMO Convention, the Convention of the International

Civil Aviation Organisation, Framework Convention on Climatic Change and Convention to Combat Desertification and Drought;

'meteorology' means the study dealing with phenomena of the a atmosphere;

'meteorological services' means

'meteorological services providers'

means…………………………………

'Minister' means the Minister responsible for Communications;

'operational hydrology' means the practical application of meteorology in relation to water and flood management;

'premises' includes any building or land, ship, aircraft, caravan but does not

include a building or place used exclusively as a dwelling place;

- 'sectoral activities' includes activities related to agriculture, marine, civil aviation, construction and building works, environment, water resources and natural disaster;

'upper air' refers to any level above ten meters from the surface of the earth;

- 'weather' means the state of the atmosphere which consists of the short-term on the scale of minutes to days variation of the atmosphere.

## Repeal and savings

53. (1) The Ghana Meteorological Agency Act, 2004 (Act 682) is hereby repealed.

(2)  Notwithstanding the repeal under subsection (1) any contracts, orders or decisions or anything made or done by a body which until the coming into force of this Act, was charged with the performance of any of the functions under this Act shall, be valid and continue in force as if it was made or done under this Act.

## Transitional provisions

54. (1) The rights, assets, and liabilities that have accrued in respect of the properties vested in Ghana Meteorological Agency in existence immediately before the coming into force of this Act shall be transferred to the Ghana Meteorological Authority established under this Act.

(2)  A person in the employment of the Ghana Meteorological Agency immediately before the coming into force of this Act, shall on the coming into force of this Act, be deemed to have been duly employed by the Ghana Meteorological Authority established under this Act on the terms  and  conditions  which  are  not  less  favourable  in  aggregate  to  the  terms  and  conditions attached to the post held by the person before the coming into force of this Act.

(3)  A  contract subsisting between the Ghana Meteorological Agency and another person and in effect immediately before the coming into force of this Act shall subsist between the Ghana Meteorological Authority and that other person subject to modifications that are necessary to ensure compliance with this Act.

(4) A person whose license ceases to be valid under the Ghana Meteorological Agency may apply to the Ghana Meteorological Authority under this Act.