## Section

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

## ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

## Emerging Technologies Agency

1. Establishment of the Agency
2. Object of the Agency
3. Functions of the Agency
4. Powers of the Agency
5. Governance of the Governing body of the Agency
6. Functions of the Board
7. Tenure of office of members
8. Meetings of the Board
9. Disclosure of interest
10. Establishment of committees
11. Allowances
12. Ministerial directives
13. Divisions
14. Appointment of Chief Executive Officer
15. Functions of the Chief Executive Officer
16. Appoint of the Deputy Chief Executive Officer
17. Other staff
18. Funds of the Agency
19. Accounts and Audits
20. Annual reports and other reports

## Guiding General Principles

21. Integrity of democratic processes and the rule of law
22. Discrimination and bias
23. Transparency and oversight
24. Personal data protection
25. Consumer protection
26. Accountability and responsibility
27. Reliability
28. Risk and impact management
29. Human oversights
30. Misinformation and disinformation
31. Security
32. Environmental safeguards
33. Intellectual Property
34. Right to Redress
35. Enforcement
36. Regulations
37. Interpretation

## Administration

## Financials

## A

## BILL

## ENTITLED

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

- A BILL to  establish  the  Emerging  Technologies  Agency  to  advance  and  facilitate  the adoption of emerging technologies; to promote research, innovation and development  of  emerging  technology  tools;  to  deploy  emerging  technology  to increase social and economic productivity; to provide a harmonised a body of rules on emerging technology obligations, rights, ethics and safety, and for related matters.

Emerging Technologies Agency

## Establishment of the Emerging Technologies Agency

1. (1)   There  is  established  by  this  Act  the  Emerging  Technologies  Agency  as  a  body corporate.

(2)   For  the  performance  of  functions,  the  Agency  may  acquire  and  hold  property, dispose of property and enter into a contract or any other related transaction.

(3)   Where there is a hindrance to the acquisition of land, the land may be acquired for the Agency under the Land Act, 2020 (Act 1036) and the cost shall be borne by the Agency.

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

## Object of the Agency

2. The objects of the Agency are to:
2. (a) advance and facilitate the adoption of emerging technology in the country;
3. (b) promote research, innovation and development of emerging technology tools in the country;
4. (c) deploy emerging technology to increase social and economic productivity;
5. (d) provide a harmonised a body of rules on rights related to risks ethics and safety;
6. (e) create awareness of emerging technology;
7. (e) promote cross-border transfer of emerging-technology-based goods and services for the international development, marketing and use of  systems;
8. (f) ensure  that  activities  related  to  emerging  technology  and  emerging  technology systems are consistent with human rights, democracy and the rule of law.

## Functions of the Agency

3. To achieve the objects under section 2, the Agency shall:
2. (a) advise the Government and public institutions on all matters related to emerging technology in the country;
3. (b) optimise emerging technology for economic development of the country;
4. (c) ensure  efficiency  within  the  emerging  technology  value  chain  by  promoting research, creativity and innovation;
5. (d) promote  an  emerging  technology  curriculum,  an  emerging  technology-based curriculum  and  emerging  technology  education,  particularly  through  inclusive educational  programmes,  to  expand  emerging  technology  knowledge  and  to increase the number of graduates, academics, practitioners and professionals with expertise  in  emerging  technology  and  related  disciplines  in  data  science,  data engineering, computer science, among others;
6. (e) equip  people,  especially  underserved  and  unserved  communities,  with  skills  in emerging technology to promote technological agency and awareness;
7. (f) empower the  youth  with  skills  and  tools  to  broaden  their  participation  in  the emerging technology value chain for, job creation opportunities, involvement in the digital economy, and the digital development of the economy;

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

- (g) develop  digital  infrastructure  to  build  robust  emerging  technology  systems  for affordable access for all persons;
- (h) promote the adoption of emerging technology in the public sector and for public services;
- (i) to create a conducive and investment-ready environment for private organisations, start-ups and innovative companies in the emerging technology industry;
- (j) encourage competitiveness in the development of emerging technology tools and systems;
- (k) facilitate data access, data availability and data governance across institutions for the  advancement  of  emerging  technology,  while  safeguarding  citizens'  privacy, security and rights in accordance with the Data Protection Act;
- (l) build  and  coordinate  an  emerging  technology  community  for  the  sharing  of knowledge, creating synergies, and development of emerging technology;
- (m) accelerate the adoption of emerging technology in key sectors of the economy including healthcare, agriculture, transportation, energy, lands and natural resources and financial services;
- (n) encourage  investments  in  the  emerging  technology  eco-system  to  provide  for sustainable development of emerging technology;
- (o) deploy  strategies  to  implement  research  findings  towards  the  promotion  of emerging technology;
- (p) establish guidelines, standards and codes of practice for risk-protected, healthy, safe, ethical and practical use of emerging technology;
- (q) address product safety, privacy and consumer protection challenges and opportunities presented by emerging technology;
- (r) provide technical support for emerging technology developers;
- (s) promote international cooperation with respect to emerging technology; and
- (t) perform any other functions which are ancillary to the objects of the Agency.

## Powers of the Agency

4. (1) The Agency shall determine the nature, process and undertakings necessary for the effective performance of its functions under this Act.

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

- (2) The Agency is granted the power to:
2. (a) issue regulations, rules, directives and guidelines under this Act;
3. (b) facilitate conciliation, mediation and negotiation on disputes arising from this Act; and
4. (c) make any determination as the Agency finds just and equitable.

## Governance of the Governing body of the Agency

5. The governing body of the Agency is a Board consisting of
2. (a) a chairperson;
3. (b) one representative from the following;
4. (i) The Ministry not below the rank of a Chief Director;
5. (ii) Data Protection Commission not below the rank of Deputy Director-General;
6. (iii) National  Information  Technology  Agency  not  below  the  rank  of  Deputy Director-General;
7. (c) one representative nominated by the Industry Forum;
8. (d) one representative from the Accra Digital Centre;
9. (e) two other persons nominated by the President on the advice of the Minister, at least one of whom is a woman; and
10. (f) Chief Executive Officer of the Agency.

## Functions of the Board

6. The Board shall, subject to the provisions of this Act,
2. (a) have oversight responsibility for the Agency;
3. (b) be responsible for the strategic direction and policies of the Agency; and
4. (c) ensure the efficient and effective performance of the functions of the Agency.

## Tenure of office of members

7. (1)  A member of the Board shall hold office for a period not exceeding three years and is  eligible  for  re-appointment but a member shall not be appointed for more than two terms.

- (2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the Chief Executive Officer of the Agency.

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

(3) A member of the Board may at any time resign from office in writing addressed to the President through the Minister.

(4) A member of the Board, other than the Chief Executive Officer who is absent from three consecutive meetings of the Board without sufficient cause ceases to be a member of the Board.

(5) The President may by letter addressed to a member revoke the appointment of that member.

(6) Where a member of the Board is, for a sufficient reason, unable to act as a member, the Minister shall determine whether the inability would result in the declaration of a vacancy.

- (7) Where there is a vacancy

(a) under subsection (3) or (4);

(b) as a result of a declaration under subsection (6); or

- (c) by reason of the death of a member the Minister shall notify the President of the vacancy and the President shall appoint a person to fill the vacancy.

## Meetings of the Board

8. (1)  The Board shall meet at least once every three months for the dispatch of business at the times and in the places determined by the chairperson.

(2) The chairperson shall at the request in writing of not less than one-third of the membership of the Board convene an extraordinary meeting of the Board at the place and time determined by the chairperson.

(3)  The quorum at a meeting of the Board is seven members of the Board or a greater number determined by the Board in respect of an important matter.

(4)  The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the Board and in the absence of the chairperson, a member of the Board elected by the members present from among their number shall preside.

(5)  Matters before the Board shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting and in the event of an equality of votes, the person presiding shall have a casting vote.

(6)  The Board may co-opt a person to attend a Board meeting but that person shall not vote on a matter for decision at the meeting.

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

## Disclosure of interest

9. (1)    A member of the Board who has an interest in a matter for consideration
2. (a) shall disclose the nature of the interest and the disclosure shall form part of the record of the consideration of the matter; and
3. (b) shall not participate in the deliberations of the Board in respect of that matter.
- (2) A member ceases to be a member of the Board if that member has an interest on a matter before the Board and
5. (a) fails to disclose that interest; or
6. (b) participates in the deliberations of the Board in respect of the matter.

## Establishment of committees

10. (1)   The Board may establish committees consisting of members of the Board or nonmembers or both to perform a function.

- (2)   A committee of the Board may be chaired by a member of the Board.
- (3)   Section 8 applies to members of committees of the Board.

## Allowances

11. Members of the Board and members of a committee of the Board shall be paid the allowances  approved  by  the  Minister  in  consultation  with  the  Minister  responsible  for Finance.

## Ministerial directives

12. The Minister may give directives to the Board on matters of policy.

## Administration

## Divisions of the Agency

13. (1)  There shall be established the following divisions of the Agency for the purpose of its functions:

- (a) Artificial Intelligence Division
- (b) Blockchain-based technology Division

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

- (c) Internet of Things (IoT) Division
- (d) Cloud technology Division
- (e) Quantum computing Division

(2)  The Board shall establish such other divisions of the Agency for the effective and efficient discharge of the functions of the Agency.

## Appointment of Chief Executive Officer

14. (1)   The President shall, in accordance with article 195 of the Constitution, appoint a Chief Executive Officer for the Agency.

(2)   The Chief Executive Officer shall hold office on the terms and conditions specified in the letter of appointment.

(3)  The Chief Executive Officer shall not be subject to suspension or dismissal by any Agency during his or her term.

(4)   The Chief Executive Officer shall be a person of high moral character and integrity with the relevant professional qualifications and experience related to the functions of the Agency.

## Functions of the Chief Executive Officer

15. (1) The Chief Executive Officer is responsible for

- (a) the day-to-day administration of the affairs of the Agency and is answerable to the Board in the performance of functions under this Act, and
- (b) the implementation of the decisions of the Board.

(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall perform any other functions determined by the Board.

(3) The Chief Executive Officer may delegate a function to an officer of the Agency but shall not be relieved of the ultimate responsibility for the performance of the delegated function.

## Appointment of Deputy Chief Executive Officer

16. (1) The President shall, in accordance with article 195 of the Constitution appoint a Deputy Chief Executive Officer for the Agency.

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

(2) The Deputy Chief Executive Officer shall hold office on such terms and conditions as shall be specified in his letter of appointment.

(3) The Deputy Chief Executive Officer shall be responsible to the Chief Executive Officer in the performance of his functions under this Act.

(4) The Deputy Chief Executive Officer  shall, subject to the provisions of this Act

- (a) assist the Chief Executive Officer in the discharge of his functions and perform such other functions as the Director General may delegate to him; and
- (b) be  responsible  for  the  direction  of  the  Agency  when  the  Chief  Executive Officer is absent from Ghana or is otherwise unable to perform his functions.

## Appointment of other staff

17. (1) The President shall, in accordance with article 195 of the Constitution, appoint any other staff of the Agency that are necessary for the efficient and effective performance of the functions of the Agency.

(2) Other public officers may be transferred or seconded to the Agency or may give assistance to the Agency.

(3)   The Agency may, for the efficient and effective discharge of the functions of the Agency, engage the services of consultants and advisors on the recommendation of the Board.

Finances of the Agency

## Funds of the Agency

18. The funds of the Agency include

- (a) moneys approved by Parliament;
- (b) grants and donations;
- (c) internally generated funds; and
- (d) any other moneys that are approved by the Minister responsible for Finance.

## Accounts and audit

19. (1) The Board shall keep books of accounts and proper records in relation to them in the form approved by the Auditor-General.

(2) The Board shall submit the accounts of the Agency to the Auditor-General for audit within three months after the end of the financial year.

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

(3)  The  Auditor-General  shall,  not  later  than  three  months  after  the  receipt  of  the accounts, audit the accounts and forward a copy of the audit report to the Minister.

## Annual report and other reports

20. (1) The Board shall within one month after the receipt of the audit report, submit an annual report to the Minister covering the activities and the operations of the Agency for the year to which the report relates.

(2)  The annual report shall include the report of the Auditor-General.

(3)  The Minister shall, within one month after the receipt of the annual report, submit the report to Parliament with a statement that the Minister considers necessary.

(4) The Board shall also submit to the Minister any other reports, which the Minister may require in writing.

## General Guiding Principles

## Integrity of democratic processes and the rule of law

21. Emerging  technology  systems  shall  not  be  used  to  undermine  the  integrity, independence and effectiveness of elections and governance, democratic institutions and processes.

## Discrimination and bias

22. Emerging technology systems, shall not be used to perpetuate algorithmic biases, discriminations, and human biases, regardless of one's background or characteristics.

## Transparency and oversight

23. Emerging  technology  systems  shall  ensure  adequate  transparency  and  oversight requirements  tailored  to  the  specific  contexts  and  that  risks  are  in  place  in  respect  of activities within the lifecycle of emerging technology systems, including with regard to the identification of content generated by emerging technology systems.

## Personal data protection

24. Emerging  technology  systems  that  process  personal  data  shall  comply  with  the obligations under the Data Protection Act.

## Consumer protection

25. Any person supplying a product or service involving emerging technology shall give consumers  clear  and  unambiguous  warnings,  labelling  and  opportunities  to  give  or withhold informed consent.

## Accountability and responsibility

26. Emerging technology system should provide accountability and responsibility for adverse impacts on human rights, democracy and the rule of law resulting from activities within the lifecycle of emerging technology systems.

## Reliability

27. Emerging technology systems should be robust and reliable, meaning they should be able to handle unexpected inputs, errors, and malicious attacks, through rigorous testing, monitoring,  and  safeguards  to  ensure  the  safety  and  security  of  emerging  technology systems.

## Risk and impact management

28. Emerging technology systems must adopt or maintain measures for the identification, assessment, prevention and mitigation of risks  posed  by  emerging technology  systems  by  considering  actual  and  potential  impacts  to  human  rights, democracy and the rule of law.

## Human oversights

29. Human intervention, interface or review shall be necessary for emerging technology decisions  that  substantially  affect  the  rights  of  persons,  including  decisions  related  to health, law enforcement, employment and elections.

## Misinformation and disinformation

30. Emerging technology systems shall not spread false information including emerging technology-generated misinformation and disinformation.

## Security

31. Emerging technology systems should provide robust security protection of its cyber system.

## Environmental safeguards

## Enforcement

35. (1) For the time being and until such time as the Minister may direct, the following regulatory bodies shall monitor and enforce compliance in accordance with the general guiding principles and subsection (2):

- (a) the Electoral Commission of Ghana shall be responsible for section 20;
- (b) the  Commission  on  Human  Rights  and  Administrative  Justice  shall  be responsible for section 21, and where appropriate, the Ministry in charge of labour affairs or the National Labour Commission shall be responsible for section 21;
- (c) the National Information Technology Agency shall be responsible for section 22;
- (d) the Data Protection Authority shall be responsible for section 23;
- (e) the  Ghana  Standards  Authority,  Foods  and  Drugs  Authority  shall  be responsible  for  section  24,  and  depending  on  the  sector,  the  applicable regulatory body shall also be responsible for section 24;
- (f) the  Commission  on  Human  Rights  and  Administrative  Justice  shall  be responsible for section 25;
- (g) the National Information Technology Agency shall be responsible for section 26;
- (h) the Cybersecurity Authority shall be responsible for section 27;

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

32. Developers of emerging technology systems, particularly those requiring extensive energy  consumption  and  likelihood  of  increased  carbon-dioxide  emissions,  leading  to massive introduction of electronic waste should ensure environmental safeguards.

## Intellectual Property

33. Developers of emerging technology and emerging technology systems should be entitled to intellectual property rights in accordance with the existing laws.

## Right to Redress

34. Notwithstanding section 35(2), a person shall have a right of redress for breach of any provision of this Act in Court.

## Miscellaneous

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

- (i) depending on the sector, the applicable ministry or regulatory body shall also be responsible for section 28;
- (j) the  National  Communications  Authority,  Ghana  Standards  Authority  and Foods  and  Drugs  Authority  and  Data  Protection Authority shall be responsible  for  section  29,  and  depending  on  the  sector,  the  applicable regulatory body, shall also be responsible for section 29;
- (k) the Cybersecurity Authority shall be responsible for section 30;
- (l) the Environmental Protection Agency shall be responsible for section 31; and
- (m) the Registrar General's Department, Ghana Patent Registry and the Copyright Office shall be responsible for section 32.

(2) Without prejudice to other penalties under any other enactment or law, a person who  breaches  any  of  the  guiding  principles  under  this  Act  shall  be  liable  to  an administrative penalty of not less than one thousand penalty units and not more than five thousand penalty units, depending on the severity of the infraction.

## Regulations

36. The Minister may, by legislative instrument, make Regulations:
2. (a) on  specific  matters  relating  to  enforcement  and  compliance  of  the  general guiding principles;
3. (b) on specific measures related to penalties for breach of the Act;
4. (c) to prescribe the procedure for collaboration with other public institutions;
5. (d) to prescribe matters related to administrative decision-making;
6. (e) on codes of practice;
7. (f) generally, on matters for the effective implementation of the Act.

## Interpretation

## 37. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,

'algorithm' means a set of instructions designed to accomplish a task;

'artificial intelligence' means technology that enables computers and machines to simulate human learning, comprehension, problem solving, decision-making, creativity and autonomy;

'block -chain based technology' means an advanced decentralised digital record or digital ledger of transactions, that enables recording of transactions, tracking of assets, and sharing of records across computer networks in a transparent and immutable way;

'Court' means High Court of Ghana;

'cloud  technology'  means  technology  that  delivers  computing  services  and  offers  on -demand  access  to  computing  resources  such  as  physical  or  virtual  services,  data

## EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES BILL, 2025

storage, servers, databases, networking, intelligence, analytics, and software over the internet;'

- 'emerging  technology'  means  novel  or  evolving  systems,  tools  or  methods  that  have transformative impacts ndustry, society, economy, and governance, and include but is not limited to:
- (a) Artificial Intelligence
- (b) Blockchain-based technology
- (c) Internet of Things (IoT)
- (d) Cloud technology
- (e) Quantum computing
- 'emerging technology systems' means newly developed or evolving technological systems of emerging technology that integrate automation, data processing, connectivity, and intelligence.
- 'Internet  of  Things  (IoT)'  means  a  network  of  interrelated  physical  devices,  vehicles, appliances  and  other  physical  objects  that  connect  and  exchange  data  with  other devices  and  the  cloud  across  wireless  networks,  and  are  typically  embedded  with sensors,  processing  ability  and  software  and  can  include  mechanical  and  digital machines and consumer objects;'

'Minister'  means  Minister  responsible  for  Communication,  Digital  Technology  and Innovations;

'Ministry' means Ministry of Communication, Digital Technology and Innovations;

- 'quantum  computing'  means  technology  that  solves  complex  problems  based  on principles of quantum mechanics.